welcome to instigators of change a
coastal Adventures podcast where we take
a look at innovative ideas the people
who come up with them and those who
invest in them
[Music]
I'm Kara Miller and today tough talk on
cancer which has been a top killer in
America for decades in the 2000s the
idea was that oh you know you would
sequence cancer cells find genetic
mutations in them and then find drugs
that Target those genetic mutations The
Physician and writer Siddhartha
Mukherjee says that idea mostly fell
flat and it's time to admit we badly
need something new we have as a
community have to acknowledge that if we
don't acknowledge that we will be not a
scientific Community but something else
co-founders of fight Therapeutics talk
about a different way forward we're not
going to chemically engineer our way out
of this problem I think we've got to
think orthogonally and really do the
physiological work to starve these
tumors that's just ahead on instigators
of change
[Music]
after Neil Armstrong landed on the moon
in 1969
[Applause]
Richard Nixon triumphantly announced and
this was just a couple years later what
became known as America's cancer
moonshot the goal being as Nixon said
the conquest of cancer it's a little bit
like saying we're going to send a rocket
to the moon without knowing Newton's
Laws Siddhartha Mukherjee is a physician
focusing on cancer and an assistant
professor of medicine at Columbia he won
a Pulitzer Prize for his book on cancer
the Emperor of all maladies when the
cancer Moon shot was launched we
understood very little about cancer this
was a time when there was a big debate
about what cancer is as a disease is it
a viral disease is it a genetic disease
is it a combination
treatments were also perplexing to
doctors and researchers and there was a
real danger to this moonshot Mukherjee
says people thought kind of what the
actual moonshot in the 1960s it was
going to result in something concrete we
had landed on the moon maybe now we
would Conquer Cancer
but then we didn't so here are the stats
more than half a million Americans die
of cancer every single year Mukherjee
has become convinced that we just have
to do something different and that he
says means looking back at some very old
research which may never have been
really embraced in the way it should
have been almost a hundred years ago
starting with work done by Otto Warburg
there's been this idea that in terms of
metabolism
cancers share very very different
cancers breast cancer leukemias
pancreatic cancer share a metabolic
dependence on nutrients so what if you
could figure out how cancer cells which
behave differently and deal with energy
differently from other cells in your
body what if you could figure out just
what nutrients the cancer cells need to
thrive and then not let them have those
nutrients
Mukherjee is seeking to answer that
question as a co-founder of the company
Phi Therapeutics along with several
fellow researchers and Physicians Anand
Parikh is also co-founder of Phi
Therapeutics where he serves as the CEO
the research phase is becoming
overwhelming that this is almost
certainly a new therapeutic approach
akin to surgery radiotherapy or drugs
that Precision Nutrition is just waiting
for its time in the Sun as it relates to
cancer treatment
and just go further on that for
laypeople what the heck is Precision
Nutrition and what have people found in
the lab like what kinds of manipulations
of nutrition have they done and what
have they done to the cancers
yeah I think these are very specific
manipulations intended to look at what's
the organ of origin so Sid said is it
breast cancer what's the prevailing
genotype is it hurt to you positive
what's the drug that's being used to
treat this cancer and then we look at
the nutrients that are needed by that
particular tumor type and that's where
we find the commonalities that Sid was
mentioning and you know we've seen
research on things as varied as serine
and glycine deprivation insulin
deprivation histidine supplementation
methionine these very specific nutrients
we find that particular tumors or
particular groups of tumors acid alluded
to
have a excess Reliance on these things
and that if you take them away it harms
them and what we've seen in many of the
pre-clinical studies is tremendous
tremendous outcomes in some cases
greater than we would see with
traditional drugs literally diet being
more powerful than chemotherapy in
pre-clinical models in pancreatic cancer
you know a horrible horrible disease
that now we're hoping to bring some
potentially new treatments to
Sid let me switch over to you when we
think about these really obscure
nutrients that many people have never
heard of what does it mean to an actual
patient to try to deprive this cancer
mass in their body from getting access
to one of these nutrients that
apparently the cancer does really well
with
well first of all let me just say that
these are not obscure nutrients okay
okay these we may not have heard of them
but it doesn't mean they're obscure yeah
these are fundamental nutrients that
Cancers and our bodies depend on okay in
order to function physiologically
so these are nutrients that we can
manipulate because our body can make
them but cancer cells are uniquely
dependent on them I often like to use
the analogy of the Achilles heel cancers
have Achilles heels too we just have to
find the Achilles heel
and these are nutrients that our bodies
can make our bodies can survive with our
bodies can even survive without because
we can make them ourselves but cancer
cells are uniquely dependent on them if
you deprive them of the nutrient the
cancer cells shrivel up and die
so I really think about nutrition as a
completely novel axis of oncology of
cancer therapy
it's never really been fully explored
and it's a novel axis it's an axis that
really
lies outside
the traditional sort of chemotherapy
radiotherapy surgery axis because no one
has aside from you know experiments done
100 years ago no one's really fully
looked at how important it is for a
cancer cell to have nutrients because
nutrients is are the ways that cancer
cells grow there's no other way there's
no other mechanism by which they can
grow
so just on a practical level
what does it mean for Joe the cancer
patient not to have you know I don't
know glycine in his diet what does it
practically mean for this person who has
cancer what do they do on a day-to-day
basis
it means changing the diet but let me
emphasize that these are not radical
diets these are diets that we've devised
and are continuing to devise that have
to do with very particular manipulations
and these very particular manipulations
have to do with you know maintaining
normal diets normal nutrition normal
energetics
but with something that's different okay
and those differences I think the
emphasis is on the fact that these are
tolerable
achievable these are not like you know
you go on some crazy
these are very specific Precision diets
which almost mimic your normal lifestyle
except you and you wouldn't notice it
but the cancer cell would notice it uh
do you have any thoughts about it yeah I
think that's very fair and I think you
know Sid mentioned the variegated nature
of all these tumors and the diets are
just as multitudinous right it will be
different for each particular group that
is taking a particular intervention uh
dietary intervention it will be
different the Precision Nutrition will
be different so whereas someone who is
being deprived of glycine
may have a particular type of diet
someone who's being deprived of
cholesterol well theirs will look very
very different so there are differences
there I think one thing we've tried to
do as a company is as Sid mentioned make
it as easy as possible on the patient so
we will send them literally everything
they need to their door to make it as
absolutely easy for them to comply as
possible
underlying all of this it seems clear
from what you're saying is this idea of
precision that like everybody is
different so it feels like underneath
all the the food and thinking about
amino acids is a pretty hefty level of I
think this wave that we're kind of part
of this idea of precision Medicine of
like using computers
to figure a lot of things out about who
needs what is that fair
I think that's absolutely fair and I I'd
like to draw a line you know Sid sort of
talked about
Warburg and his initial work in the
1930s and then how Sid and Lou and Karen
and others have been publishing papers
over the last 10 years you know showing
how thinking about organ of origin
genotype and uh and drug can provide us
with a level of specificity that maybe
Warburg didn't foresee
and I think in the future once the FDA
is able to contemplate this I think
we're not just going to see you know
small slivers of people on very specific
diets I think we're going to see n of
one Precision Nutrition so that the
breast cancer patient the two patients
who said mentioned who have breast
cancer but a very different in terms of
their mutational status in terms of the
physiology and the etiology of their
tumor will have slightly different
Precision Nutrition prescriptions and
you know the way we figure all of this
out because
I think the data is so voluminous and
it's too difficult for any one person to
comprehend is we have a machine Learning
System that literally spits out the
difference in every single
phenotype genotype of tumor and the
difference between use and production in
nutrients and from that we can then
surmise that a particular tumor will
have different uh needs than another one
that otherwise might look quite similar
so this could be for either of you and
it's a bigger question than Faith
because if so much importance is placed
on kind of the machine learning the data
analysis that has to be done because as
you said like there's so many inputs no
person's gonna like sit down and compute
this Are We There Yet with like how good
data analysis is how good machine
learning is because I think people think
of curing cancer or getting further with
cancer as like you know relying on men
and women pipetting things in a lab
right but we're really talking about a
different set of tools and I just wonder
how far along you think those tools are
we're talking about the both of those
tools together so we're talking about
you know using machine learning to help
stratify the world of cancer and then
using experiments in the lab to further
drill down and validate
um so I think it's a mix of both the
other thing I would say is that even if
the machine learning isn't good enough
today or isn't where we would want it to
be perfect today uh unfortunately
neither are cancer drugs right so yeah
we sort of see this situation where I
was thinking about uh a drug called and
hurt you that got a standing ovation at
ASCO with a 40 odd percent response rate
you know there will be uh we won't be
perfect in having every patient respond
to a particular Precision Nutrition
intervention but even if we break those
you know sort of 30 40 threshold it can
be practice changing for many diseases
Sid what's your take on this
well I would Echo Evan's ideas and I
would say that's not 40 or 50 because it
will likely be more
because well we're targeting are not
particular mechanisms
or genetic mutations that
Drive cancers we are targeting
the general physiology by which a cancer
cell grows and that's been you know the
Holy Grail to some extent of cancers
in the 2000s the idea was that oh you
know we would sequence cancer cells find
genetic mutations in them and then find
drugs that Target those genetic
mutations right right
that was the big idea right that idea I
think has turned out to be aside from a
few cancers a great disappointment and
we have as a community we have to
acknowledge that
if we don't acknowledge that we will be
not a scientific Community but something
else
I'll give you an example after about two
decades of research a drug was created
around one of the biggest drivers of
cancer called Keras
it was a drug that was specific to that
mutation
and it was specific to the idea that
that mutation would drive the Cancer's
physiology when the drug was used in a
typical trial it was a positive clinical
trial all good but the progression-free
survival was you know nothing that one
would applaud 12 months 18 months I
don't remember the number this is a
reminder that cancer cells are
incredibly plastic
in terms of their capacity to resist
drugs that are targeted to the mutations
that drive their growth hmm
and I would say that we as a community
of oncologists have turned our heads
away
from the idea
in the 2000s and 1990s that oh you know
there was a linear idea you know find
the mutations Target the mutations kill
the cancer cells end of story right it
has not worked out to be that
so we need a new paradigm
and the new paradigm is to say that you
know
that old idea
was a good idea but it wasn't right
and so we need a new paradigm a new
paradigm has to be
that we need to Target fundamental
physiological mechanisms in a cancer
cell
s that are different from a normal cell
and thereby Target cancer it's a
completely new idea and I cannot
emphasize how revolutionary and how much
of a difference this is in the standard
thinking about cancer the standard
thinking about cancer is oh you have
cancer sequence it find the mutations
and find the drugs that will Target the
mutations right that has not worked
it has not worked not only with minor
mutations
it has not worked with mutations that
are known to be the major drivers of the
cancer cell
so we can put like ostriches our heads
in the sand and say oh you know let's go
on this way that has not worked and if
we keep putting our heads like ostriches
and sand it will keep not working
we need to find a new way forward
which lies outside this kind of linear
logic of find the cancer find the
mutation and find a drug that blocks the
mutation that is not working one thing I
would add I think what Sid said is so
important because it totally undercuts
the prevailing Orthodoxy and I think it
takes a lot of courage and I'm not sure
there are a lot of people with enough
courage to say what Sid just said that
essentially
ever more fine-grained discovery of
smaller and smaller mutations and better
chemistry is not going to solve this
problem of cancer we're not gonna
chemically engineer our way out of this
problem I think we've got to think
orthogonally and really do the
physiological work to starve these
tumors and let me add more to that I've
tried to understand the prevailing
orthodoxies and I've tried to reconcile
myself with them and no one was more
excited than me when we found a drug
that would Target one of the great
mutations drivers in cancer like eras
and yet no one was more disappointed in
the results
and so we have got to change we have got
to think of new paradigms
do you feel like it's an issue of sort
of ignoring something that's systemic
that I mean it sounds from what you're
describing like you've got a building
and people are looking for the brick
that's messed up but in fact the problem
is like the air conditioning system like
it's something that is not confined to
just one little place it's more part of
the how the entire system works
um I've I've been saying this for
forever I mean I think that cancer is a
physiological disease the cancer cells
are physiologically different from
normal cells and the more we explore
that physiology outside finding
mutations
is the best way to move forward
um I wrote a piece in the New York Times
called cancer should not be about
mutation hunting cancer is a
physiological disease most diseases
every disease that we know of
is a physiological disease but
physiology I mean it integrates multiple
aspects of human biology
there are signals that go between cells
these signals can counteract or even
inactivate drugs that we send with great
Precision to cancer cells and cancer is
one of them so I stand by my belief that
unless we understand cancer at a
physiological level we're not going to
be we're not going to move forward
on and um let me ask you a little bit
about food one of the things I've found
over the years is I've spoken to
different doctors different researchers
is that
food even though we know it it is very
important in keeping you healthy it's
often doesn't get that kind of credit I
mean there have been you know like
little programs where doctors are
allowed to prescribe vegetables and like
you might be able to get those for free
but if you find that food really can
help with cancer how do you get a sort
of establishment that's uh really about
pills
um and and other kinds of medications to
accept food as part of like health and
medication
I think that's a great question I think
the first thing is proving efficacy if
you can prove that this treatment
modality can deliver outcomes that are
you know off the level or greater than
traditional Therapeutics
I think there will be a Groundswell from
the patients themselves saying look this
is something we need to have access to
because it's going to help us live for
longer and potentially cure disease and
so I think in many other disease States
the power of food is already recognized
you know you look at diabetes you look
even at cardiovascular disease to a
degree you think about inborn areas of
metabolism uh irritable bowel syndrome
pediatric epilepsy there's a variety of
diseases where we do acknowledge and
understand the power of food in either
managing or treating those diseases I
think it's only a question of time until
it comes to cancer and once it does and
if it demonstrates efficacy of the same
degree or greater than drugs then
there's no reason why it should not be
uh paid for it to uh in the same way
I've often said this and I often you
know repeat it but I really do mean it I
hope that if fight is successful that we
have a hundred competitors very very
quickly because we alone will not be
able to do the work needed to truly
explore this entire new access of
treatment we need a lot more people in
the space very very quickly and just to
add to Ireland's point I mean you know
food is a chemical chemotherapy is a
chemical targeted therapy is a chemical
there is no fundamental difference
between food as a chemical chemotherapy
is a chemical targeted therapy is a
chemical these are all the same things
they just come by different names if a
chemical or an enzyme like l
asparaginase
can deplete asparagine in the body and
thereby really make a difference in
pediatric leukemia
there's no fundamental reason why
depleting asparagine in another way
whatever it might be could make a
difference in pediatric leukemia they're
just chemicals and the idea that food is
not a chemical is absurdity because of
course it is
so my general point is that as a
chemical food has been underexplored and
should be more deeply explored as one
other axis of chemical therapy for
cancer in which we are not dependent so
much on as I said the the find the
mutation and find the drug strategy
which has not worked and I think one of
the thing to add to that the Precision
Nutrition interventions we're talking
about Cara and not things that generally
an individual can do by themselves you
know okay uh earlier on you said well
what would an example be right you know
if you're depleting serine Glycine and
Proline nobody's going to have any idea
where to start and how we do it right
right does that mean I order pizza or
pasta like nobody knows that's right
it's not that simple right it is a
chemical in many ways it looks and feels
to the patient like food but they're
drug-like components to it as well
do you see Precision Nutrition as doing
the heavy lifting here or is this a
situation in which yeah I mean I know
there have been studies where let's say
a diet like a keto kind of diet has made
a drug much more effective because that
kind of diet appears to sort of pave the
way for a drug to actually work you know
what I mean can you give me a sense of
is this an in conjunction thing or is
this an end in itself
I think it can be both I think in some
cases you will see Precision Nutrition
that makes Adverse Events disappear and
that makes the drug more effective I
think some have Sid and lose work has
shown that I think in other cases you
will see that the nutrition itself can
be a very very valuable therapeutic
strategy in and of itself which Karen
valzan and Oliver and others have shown
as well so I I think it can be both I
think it just depends on what's needed
you both think that this area of cancer
research is really promising if you look
out five or ten years does food feel to
you like the most exciting area are
there other sort of Realms that are also
being explored that you find like these
are also really promising
paths into you know cancer research
well you know I think that you know
immunotherapy showed us something very
important and again let me emphasize
this
what we learned from immunotherapy
against cancer using the immune system
against cancer
is that you didn't need necessarily to
sequence every tumor because the immune
system was largely agnostic to what
sequences what genetic mutations the
tumor had
the immune system reacted to the changes
the physiological changes in the tumor
itself things that didn't have to do
with whether it had a mutation in Keras
or
dnmt3a or or whatever it might be
I think more and more we are moving away
from a time in which we're saying to
ourselves yes Precision medicine is
important but Precision medicine is not
the sequencing of tumors it's something
much broader
it is understanding the physiology of
the tumor what does it depend on one
tumor might depend on its capacity to
draw out blood vessels another tumor
might depend very highly on histidine
yet another tumor might depend very
highly on glucose metabolism
and so the way I see moving forward is
really understanding Precision medicine
not as what I call sequencing medicine
and moving forward in in a way that we
understand Precision medicine as a
mechanism to understand the brain of the
tumor the mind of the tumor the
physiology of the tumor and using that
as a mechanism and of course nutrition
is absolutely Central to that idea
and do you think of what faith will
provide to patients as being like when
you go on certain diets all your meals
are pre-packaged and sent to you do you
see that as being like the thing that
you give to patients
yeah so I think what Fife does and
delivers to patients is a tripartite
approach what we do is we have Precision
Nutrition we have drugs and we have
software and we wrap them together in
that unified package okay so we do all
of them we make sure that the drugs
we're providing you know work with the
Precision Nutrition as well and that
they're both optimized for each other
but that's what I anticipate that these
patients will be getting from fight
okay do you think because there's a big
piece of this it's food and maybe in
some cases for some people it's just a
food thing
could this be cheaper than other
treatments because one of the real
problems we've seen with cancer drugs
especially in recent years is they're
just phenomenally expensive
I think I think unfortunately so I hope
that they can be cheaper I think in
manufacturing because we are actually
manufacturing food to a degree they will
be more expensive because you know
manufacturing each additional pill is
pennies manufacturing a meal is not but
I do think that a lot of that will go to
the FDA you know the overwhelming cost
in drug development is sort of in the
clinical development of the drug it's
not actually in the manufacturing
um it's mostly in all of running the
trials the regulatory hoopla and all of
that stuff so I do think that in the
future with this treatment modality if
the FDA can stop thinking creatively
that we could then be able to bring
treatments to the entire globe that are
much much cheaper than traditional uh
treatments I think that's the other
great thing about this approach right is
that
immunotherapy and other biologics are
quite difficult to manufacture and
administer outside of sophisticated
Medical Systems like in the U.S and
Western Europe I think our intervention
has the ability to be delivered in
almost any setting uh theoretically
and then a final question for both of
you which is
um give me a sense of the timeline here
like how are you going to know when
things work if people are listening and
they're very interested and they agree
yes we need a different approach to
cancer what does that road ahead look
like
I mean the timeline is now I mean we are
already deploying we are already making
diets we are already combining them with
Kim with targeted therapies the timeline
is now it'll keep being now it will keep
being now more but uh Anand can answer
it more but we are in the middle of
Trials okay okay that's right I think
you know we're very very excited about
the trials that we have ongoing but I am
hopeful that in
you know the next 12 to 18 months let's
say that we have data in our hands that
can show the entire world academic or
otherwise then Precision Nutrition can
be this fourth pillar of Cancer Care as
said mentioned and will those results in
12 to 18 months allow you to move
through the door from trials to like the
wider World they will allow us to move
from I would say mid-sized trials to
really large trials that will prove
definitively the value proposition now
that's my assumption that that will
ultimately be of course up to the FDA
and then if everything were to go well
how long would it be do think from now
that something would actually be on the
market and a doctor somewhere could say
well you have this cancer and here's
we're gonna use Fife like how long would
that be do you think
hate to Hazard a guess at that because
we we're ready you know the company is
ready and ready to execute it's really
in the hands of uh The Regulators to a
degree so I'm hoping in the next few
years the next two to three years that
we can kind of be at that point uh but
ultimately it will depend on what The
Regulators need to see uh to believe got
it okay
is a co-founder and the CEO of fight
Therapeutics Sid Mukherjee is also a
co-founder of Fife as well as a Pulitzer
prize-winning author a physician and an
assistant professor of medicine at
Columbia thanks so much to both of you
pleasure my pleasure thank you Carol
[Music]
and thanks as always to you for joining
us coming up next week we find that for
successful Venture capitalists they
actually aren't very swayed by Charisma
and passion at all they actually look
for that rationality and a clear and
well-explained Pitch more than anything
else so I just would urge people to
think about even if they think they're
not good at some of the skills that they
might think they need for startups that
doesn't mean they can't be successful
subscribe to instigators of change
wherever you get your podcasts and leave
us a review our show is produced by Matt
Purdy I'll talk to you next week
[Music]